Bitcoin Privacy series

Privacy and UTXO [part 1]:

How UTXO works?

What is UTXO?

UTXO means Unspent Transaction Output.

We’ll stick to UTXO because it’s shorter, but the full name can help you understand the concept, so keep it in mind.

UTXO is the output from previous transactions that you can use as an input on your next transactions.

Received transaction

UTXO from that transaction

New transaction

UTXO in Bitcoin transactions

Even though wallets give the impression that bitcoins are sent from and to wallets, the truth is that bitcoins actually move from transaction (Tx) to transaction (Tx).

MYTH

Alice’s wallet

Sends bitcoin

Bob’s wallet

REALITY

Tx to Alice’s address

Uses UTXO from Tx

Tx to Bob’s address

So whatever you use as input to one transaction, eventually came out as an output of a previous transaction.

Previous Tx

creates

UTXO available

Is used as

Tx input

to

New Tx

Unless we are talking about coinbase transactions, which are special transactions that miners create with each new block and only have outputs.

These transactions are used to issue new bitcoins - for now - and are entitled to collect fees from transactions.

Block mining

creates

Coinbase outputs

Is used as

Tx input

to

New Tx

How does it work?

You can think of it as a digital money bill, in the sense that it has a value of its own and can’t be divided.

Also, the sum of your UTXOs represents your total balance.

BALANCE: 4.2 BTC

If you need to pay more than that value, you need to gather more than one UTXO and use them together.

If you need to pay less than the UTXO value, or if you surpass the amount by using more than one UTXO, you’ll have to create a new UTXO as a change. The original UTXOs have to be spent completely.

Amount to pay

UTXOs you’ll use

New UTXO as change

These UTXOs are what really is behind the “money transfer” in Bitcoin transactions.

Taking it to Alice and Bob

Suppose Bob’s wallet says he has 4 bitcoins that are divided into 4 UTXOs of 1 bitcoin each. Let’s see what a payment would look like.

Note: This is a simplification that doesn’t account for transaction fees.

Bob wants to pay 2.5 bitcoins to Alice.

His wallet will have to use 3 of the available UTXOs and turn them into inputs of the transaction.

UTXOs can only be spent once. So, once the 3 UXTOs are used, they become SPENT transaction outputs and can no longer be used as inputs to a new transaction.

2 complete new UTXOs are generated:

New UTXO for Alice

One that can be used by Alice in the value of 2.5 BTC — the payment itself.

New UTXO as Bob’s change

One that can be used by Bob in the value of 0.5 BTC — the change.

Finally, Bob’s wallet will end with 2 UTXOs: 1 remaining with 1 BTC and the new one with 0.5 BTC.

Author: Patrícia Estevão

Editor: Marco Agner

Translator: [Your name/handle or "Crowdsourced translation"]

Main sources:
https://bitcoin.org/en/developer-guide#block-chain-overview
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HScK4pkDNds