Public Key Cryptography in Bitcoin transactions

bitcoindesigned.com

Public key cryptography is also known as Asymmetrical Encryption because it uses 2 different keys – a pair of a public and a private key – instead of one to encrypt data.

Symmetrical encryption

Only 1 encryption key (both communicating parties have to know it)

When you receive a message:

Sender’s message

Encrypts with key

Cipher text

Sends to

You

Decrypts with key

Message

Asymmetrical encryption

Public key (show to people you want to communicate with)

Private key (keep it a secret, only you know it)

When you receive a message:

Sender’s message

Encrypts with  your public key

Cipher text

Sends to

You

Decrypts with your private key

Message

The general goal of public key cryptography is to prove you have a secret without having to show it to anyone. And the secret is your private key.

Not having to share your private key is one of the advantages of this type of encryption.

Digital signature

When you use your private key to sign a message you create a digital signature.

That can prove the message was written by the owner of the private key.

It’s a type of authentication.

This digital signature was created with the pair of this public key.

Bitcoin Address

The address we use in Bitcoin to receive money is actually a derivation from your public key.

When you send money to an address, you are saying “the bitcoins can be used by the owner of the keys correspondent to this address”.

Bitcoin ownership:

Private key

Public key

Derived into

Bitcoin address

Bitcoin Transactions

The most common type of Bitcoin transaction is called Pay to Public Key Hash (P2PKH), which basically means “Pay to an address”.

A transaction is essentially a message that uses Public Key Cryptography to make sure the right person can unlock it.

Payment to Bob:

Pays to

Bob’s address

Controlled by

Bob’s keys

So here’s an example with the simplified dynamic of how Public Key Cryptography acts in a Bitcoin P2PKH transaction:

Bob sends you bitcoins:

Bob “locks” the bitcoins with the condition that the correct signature is presented.

He transmits the transaction to the network.

The transaction is validated by network nodes and mined.

You spend the bitcoins:

You unlock the bitcoins by answering to the previous condition (signing the transaction) and then you lock the funds with a new condition (that the signature of the recipient is presented).

Locked bitcoins

Private key

Signature + New condition

Locked bitcoins

You transmit the transaction to the network.

The transaction is validated by network nodes and mined.

Author: Patrícia Estevão

Editor: Marco Agner

External source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public-key_cryptography