The Blockchain without The Bitcoin

bitcoindesigned.com

A little more on the idea that “the real technology is the Blockchain, we should implement it without this silly Bitcoin”.

First things first - in very simple words

What is Bitcoin (with capital B)?

It’s a protocol for a decentralized peer-to-peer network that creates consensus without needing a central authority to provide trust.

What is bitcoin (with lowercase b)?

The currency  (token) issued in the mining process.

What is the blockchain?

It’s the public ledger where the network records (transactions) are written.

How does it work?

Nodes verify and propagate transactions while miners gain permission to write new blocks in it.

How do miners do it?

Solving mathematical problems using a lot of processing power (read hardware and electricity costs).

Why do they do it?

Because their investment of time and resources is rewarded with bitcoins (currently 12.5 BTC per block mined).

Isn’t it like a database?

It has the idea of a database, but one that’s decentralized and still guarantees consensus and that the entries are true.

Why can we truste it?

Because math neither lies nor has political or economic interests.

Why don’t they do bad stuff to make more money?

Because Bitcoin uses Games Theory and incentives to make it more profitable to be honest.

Now that we settled that, we can start imagining…

Ok, you want the blockchain but not bitcoins (or any other token with value).

And you need miners to write your new blocks.

That leaves 2 scenarios:

If you are imagining decentralized mining (like in Bitcoin).

You are automatically supposing the miners are going to spend time and money just for fun or for the goodness in their hearts.

Sorry, that’s not very likely.

If you know people won’t mine without an incentive (that’s a good start).

You will mine for your own (in your company, institution or other entity that chooses to use the blockchain).

Congratulations! You’ve just created a slow database.

Conclusions

The blockchain is pretty inefficient (slow and resource-consuming) if used just for registering information without a token with value.

The amount of resources “wasted” in mining only makes sense because it allows a decentralized and authority-free security.

In other words... (though not considering many technical aspects)

When you say:

Bitcoin is nothing, the real technology is the Blockchain.

It sounds as logical as:

This Internet is nothing, the really cool thing it’s HTML!

Author: Patrícia Estevão

Editor: Marco Agner

Translator: [Your name/handle or "Crowdsourced translation"]