Why is my transaction taking so long?

The time it takes for a transaction to be confirmed will strongly vary depending on many factors, some of them purely mathematical, while others will be influenced by the current market situation.

Part 1: Average Time per Block

Forget about fees and waiting lines for a second, and suppose you know your transaction will be included in the next block.

When will that be?

Next block

We know that the expected time between Bitcoin blocks is 10 minutes. So why did your transaction’s block actually took 20 minutes?

The creation of new blocks is described mathematically as a Poisson Process.

Block creation

Time

It’s a good model for the number of times an event occurs in an interval of time or space — like the rate of created blocks.

Last blocks

Next block

10 min

Time

And, it’s memoryless — it means the time the last event occurred doesn’t affect the prediction for the next event.

Let’s make it concrete:

Average rate of block creation: 1 block every 10 minutes.

Block creation rate

10 min

Time

The last block was 8 minutes ago, when should you expect the next?

Last block

Now

8 min

10 minutes from now.

Last block

Now

Next block

8 min

10 min

Time

Because the process is memoryless, so you always expect the next block to be in 10 minutes! Even if that means that the interval between the 2 blocks will be 18 minutes.

Part 2: Network activity and fees

Now that we understood how the expected time for the next block can vary, let’s get out of our theoretical bubble and ask the next important question:

Is your transaction going to be on the next block?

It might not be. It might not even be in the next 30 blocks. So what will determine that?

First thing to point out is that the space in each block is scarce, only so many transactions can fit in a single block.

If the network is too busy with tons of transactions to be mined, a lot of them will have to wait until they can get a space in a block.

Wait here

The “waiting room” for transactions is called mempool in Bitcoin, which stands for the pool of transactions stored in memory while they are not written on the blockchain.

Welcome to the MEMPOOL

Blockchain

Now you might wonder, how is this order of “next transactions in line” decided?

This leads us to a new factor: fees.

Although there is no protocol rule that establishes that, miners usually prioritize transactions with higher fees when choosing from the mempool.

So consider the situation:

The network is very busy and the average transaction fee at the moment is 0.75 USD.

I send a transaction with a fee of 0.05 USD at 10 AM.

12 hours of difference

You send a transaction with a fee of 1 USD at 10 PM.

Chances are that your transaction will be included in a block before my transaction because there’s a fierce competition for space in a block, at the moment, and I didn’t offer enough incentive for miners to choose my transaction instead of the tons of others in the waiting line.

Now I’ll have to wait (maybe days) for the transaction to confirm or to be kicked out of the mempool (requiring me to send it again).

Alternatively, there is now an option in Bitcoin called Replace By Fee (RBF), which allows me to change the fee for that transaction after sending it.

These are not the only factors that influence the time a transaction takes to be confirmed, but are the ones you’ll probably have more control as a user.

Takeaways

Even though the mathematical variations are inherent to the Bitcoin protocol, because it counts on statistics, the market-related issues are not.

An always crowded mempool can be and is being mitigated with scaling advances of the system, such as SegWit and the Lightning Network.

Even though we’ll probably have to wait a while to see them widely adopted, especially by merchants.

Witness

So what you can expect for the not so far future is that, at least for your daily coffee, there will be no need to wait too long for a confirmation.

Author: Patrícia Estevão

Editor: Marco Agner

Translator: [Your name/handle or "Crowdsourced translation"]

Main sources: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poisson_distribution
http://r6.ca/blog/20180225T160548Z.html