Bitcoin Privacy series

Privacy and Light Wallets

What are Light Wallets?

Light (or lightweight) wallets are Bitcoin wallets that don’t download the full blockchain nor verify all the transactions.

Your mobile wallet is usually lightweight.

That’s because it can be very data, energy and time consuming to keep an updated blockchain using a smartphone hardware.

So the lightweight approach would seem as a very practical solution for an easy-to-use wallet.

But there is a problem.

If the wallet doesn’t have the blockchain with it, it can’t know by itself how much money you have in your addresses.

It’s with the blockchain that we can find the records of transactions and calculate how many bitcoins each address has the right to spend.

The wallet, then, will have to ask full nodes — the ones with the full blockchain — to send it the relevant transactions where your addresses appear.

Light wallet

Tell me about my addresses.

Sure, let me check.

Full-node

The problem is that an eavesdropper can monitor the traffic of the light wallet or directly connect to it as a node in the network.

It can be more or less difficult for the eavesdropper to get useful info,
depending on the type of communication the light wallet uses.

Hi, I’m a node. Connect with me.

Eavesdropper node

But, eventually, the eavespropper will be able to identify the addresses of that wallet and how much money they can spend.

What is to be done?

Go Full-node

The older and already functional method to avoid this privacy breach is to run your own full-node.

My light wallet

My full-node

There are wallets that provide the interface to connect your own full-node to their light wallet app, such as Samourai Wallet.

Compact Client Side Filtering for Light Wallets

This big name technology was proposed by the Lightning Labs team of researchers  as an approach to this problem.

The general idea is that the full-node will provide a small index table of the blockchain that light wallets can download and use as a reference.

Full-node

Index table

Light wallet

The light wallet is, then, able to figure out by itself which blocks it needs to download in order to learn about the addresses it controls.

Light wallet with index table

I want block 742.

Aren’t you gonna tell me your addresses?

No, just the block.

Eavesdropper node

The two current projects known to be experimenting with this solution are:

Neutrino

It’s the Lightning Labs implementation of their own proposal and it’s mainly focused on mobile Lightning Network wallets.

Wasabi Wallet

Wasabi is a privacy-focused Bitcoin wallet that is doing its own implementation of the proposal above.

Author: Patrícia Estevão

Editor: Marco Agner

Reviewer: @nopara73

Translator: [Your name/handle or "Crowdsourced translation"]

Main sources:
https://medium.com/@nopara73/anonymous-bitcoin-1fae5d1e33b7
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HScK4pkDNds
https://breaking-bitcoin.com/slides/SPVSecurity.pdf
Wasabi wallet: https://medium.com/@nopara73/wasabi-privacy-focused-bitcoin-wallet-for-desktop-3962d567045a
Neutrino: https://github.com/lightninglabs/neutrino
Samourai wallet: https://samouraiwallet.com/features/trustednode