Bitcoin Privacy series

Privacy and UTXO [part 2]:

The problem of UTXO

UTXOs are publicly known

We already learned that UTXOs are, effectively, the bitcoins you have available for spending.

But those UTXOs are not privately stored in your wallet. They are, in fact, quite known by other nodes.

Every full-node in the Bitcoin network has a copy of the called UTXO set, which is a list with all UTXOs, i.e. every amount of Bitcoin that is currently available for spending.

UTXO set

Once they are used to make payments, those UTXOs will appear as inputs of the transactions where they were spent.

And these transactions are permanently and publicly stored in the blockchain.

UTXO set

Used in a new transaction

Blockchain records

So tracing UTXOs and their path through different transactions is actually quite feasible.

Previous Tx

creates UTXO used in

New Tx

creates UTXO used in

New Tx

Your privacy relies upon the fact that people don’t necessarily know which UTXOs are yours since Bitcoin addresses are pseudonymous.

But there’s always a way…

The privacy protection offered by Bitcoin’s pseudonymity is very fragile.

There are, for example, heuristics that people can use to infer revealing information about your personal finances:

Heuristic 1: “All inputs of a transaction belong to the same wallet.”

Most of the times, joining multiple inputs is a way to make a payment that is larger than any of the inputs alone.

Amount to pay

UTXOs you’ll use

So you have a good chance to be right by saying that all those inputs used in the same transaction belonged to the same wallet (and probably the same person).

UTXOs in Bob’s wallet

Which implies that the transactions that previously generated those UTXOs were all made to pay the same person/wallet.

Tx to Bob

New UTXO

From the eavesdropper point of view:

Bob makes a 2.5 BTC payment.

Assuming the inputs used were from the same wallet

We can look at the txs that generated those UTXO

And conclude they were both payments to Bob.

So if one of the addresses that paid him is a known website for freelance programmers, we now know that Bob worked as a freelancer for them.

Heuristic 2: “Changes are owned by addresses that were never seen in the blockchain.”

Imagine a transaction with 2 UTXOs created to different addresses.

Address A

Address B

Since modern wallets generate completely new addresses for the change, an eavesdropper can conclude:

If only one of them has never appeared in the blockchain, that’s probably the address generated for the change.

Change to Address B

From the eavesdropper point of view:

Bob’s Tx generates 2 UTXOs

Goes to Address A

Goes to Address B

Is on the blockchain

Isn’t on the blockchain

This is Bob’s change.

Now we know which address to keep following in order to learn more about Bob’s finances.

Heuristic 3: “Transactions from consumer’s wallets have two or fewer outputs.”

Bob sends a transaction to a service and there are two outputs, one is his change, the other is the payment to the service. But which one is which?

If we follow the next transactions of these 2 UTXOs, we might see that one of them will be in a transaction with various outputs. That’s probably the money that went to the service.

While the UTXO that went into a transaction with two or fewer outputs is identifiable as the change.

From the eavesdropper point of view:

Bob’s tx

Is the UTXO change or payment?

Next tx

Next tx

2 UTXOs

Multiple UTXOs

It was the change

It was the payment

Again, now we know which address is in Bob’s control, so we can follow it to learn more about Bob’s finances.

Heuristic 4: “Wallets don’t spend unnecessary outputs”

Alice made a transaction with multiple inputs in order to pay her rent.

Alice’s UTXOs turned into inputs for rent tx

If there’s a unique output of the transaction with a value smaller than any of the inputs, then that’s the change.

Otherwise, the wallet would have spent an unneccessary UTXO.

Rent tx

Payment

Change

Outputs

From the eavesdropper point of view:

Inputs to rent tx

Rent tx

Outputs

Is this the only UTXO smaller than all inputs?

YES

It’s the change.

NO

It isn’t the change.

Now we know which address to keep following in order to learn more about Alice’s finances.

The UTXO bottom-line

All this information gathered based on your UTXOs can be used to trace you and the rest of your money.

So, even though it relies on heuristics and is not guaranteed to work,  it’s a very serious attack vector against your privacy if no countermeasure is taken.

This is why there are efforts from many projects focused on improving privacy in Bitcoin that address the information leak from UTXO.

If you wish to learn more about them, here are some honorable mentions of projects and technologies to check out.

Wasabi Wallet; TumbleBit; Samourai wallet’s Stonewall and Ricochet; Coinjoin; JoinMarket; Confidential Transactions

Author: Patrícia Estevão

Editor: Marco Agner

Translator: [Your name/handle or "Crowdsourced translation"]

Main sources:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HScK4pkDNds