WHAT IS BITCOIN? - The Currency

bitcoindesigned.com

breaking in pieces

Digital Currency

It’s all about ones and zeros, meaning it has no physical form such as a coin.

Cryptocurrency

Based on mathematics and cryptography. Which means it can’t be counterfeit - math doesn’t lie.

limited amount

There is a limit of roughly 21 million bitcoins to be ever put in circulation.

It doesn’t allow anyone to print more bitcoins recklessly, which preserves the currency value - it’s scarce.

ownership records

Bitcoin ownership is actually a record on the Blockchain - this big decentralized ledger - saying those bitcoins were transferred to you.

mining

It’s a type of math problem that needs a lot of processing power. It’s used for writing transactions and those who do it are rewarded with transaction fees and new bitcoins, which is how the currency is issued.

divisibility

The smallest unit of Bitcoin is a Satoshi; it represents one hundred millionth of a bitcoin. But, if needed, this part can become even smaller.

the features

or... Why everyone is so crazy about it

Critical (break these and Bitcoin will never be the same)

Decentralized

No central bank can freeze your accounts or implement poorly conceived policies that devalue your currency.

No Red-Tape

Anyone can use bitcoin, no questions, no documents and no custody fees.

Pretty Anonymous

Your name isn’t linked to your transactions, making it a lot more private and safe than regular bank operations and credit card payments.

Non-repudiable

Once a bitcoin transaction is confirmed, it can’t be reverted unless there is a voluntary agreement between the two parties - such as a store policy.

Transparent

Everyone can check every address and its transactions - although you don’t know the owners of all addresses, only those identities that were entrusted to you.

changeable (market development might change these a little)

Fast

Transactions can reach anyone in any part of the world within minutes.

Possible Change

If the volume of transactions grows  a lot  - say, bitcoin becoming mainstream - transactions will take longer to be cleared on the blockchain.

What Might Happen

Besides measures to scale Bitcoin’s core, small and quick transactions will probably be cleared by third parties or other layers over the blockchain.

Cheap

Transaction fees are low - currently around 1 USD if you don’t want to wait too much for a confirmation.

Possible Change

When bitcoin issuing diminishes, the miner’s reward will come mostly from transaction fees, which will be higher.

What Might Happen

Predictive calculations indicate that fees will still be very afordable, even when covering all miners expenses alone.

Author: Patrícia Estevão

Editor: Marco Agner

Translator: [Your name/handle or "Crowdsourced translation"]