What is Bitcoin? - The Network

bitcoindesigned.com

your techy friend’s explanation

It’s a decentralized peer-to-peer network for electronic transactions without relying on a central point of trust.

Ok, whaat? Let’s break it down.

It’s a decentralized peer-to-peer network for electronic transactions without relying on a central point of trust.

decentralized

No node has more power than others, only different roles. So there isn’t a single Bitcoin server or company controlling it.

peer-to-peer

All Bitcoin nodes receive and share information at the same time, so there’s no need to have a big server with all its data.

network for electronic transactions

It allows you to send different types of transactions (contracts) using the bitcoin token as a medium of value exchange.

without relying on a central point of trust

Bitcoin achieves consensus using the Proof of Work and the blockchain, so no single entity needs or has the authority to say if a transaction is valid - it proves itself.

Bitcoin CEO

catch your breath because there’s more

Digital Cryptocurrency

Transactions are made in the network by exchanging tokens. These tokens are a currency backed by mathematical and cryptographic functions that assure its value and legitimacy.

Public Ledger

The Blockchain is the public ledger where new transactions are included and confirmed. It keeps all records of bitcoin ownership and it’s completely transparent - you can see and have your own copy.

Bitcoin is...

Platform

You can build all sorts of contracts on top of Bitcoin’s code; it’s programmable money.

Protocol

It’s a code for message exchange, so there are a bunch or rules and standards that make the whole thing work and guarantee some of its core features.

Don’t panic... this is what you should know by now

Bitcoin is a technology that replaces the middleman or central authority, making it possible for money and other aspects of people’s life to be free from this figure of control.

Bank

the poetic touch

“What the Internet has done for information, Bitcoin will do for money.”

Author: Patrícia Estevão

Editor: Marco Agner